There are several goals to this code challenge, including quantifying the relationship between MLP
neuron activations and token length, and also looking at how processing characteristics change over
different layers in the network.
You will also learn a few ways of visualizing activity over the different layers, and a reminder about
the correlation coefficient and its relationship to covariance.
This will be a kind of longish code challenge, so I will break it up into two videos somewhere in the
middle.
Exercise one is fairly straightforward.
In fact, you will see that importing models, connecting to the GPU, and defining and implanting hooks
is code that you will be using repeatedly.
Anyway, we are going to work with the Eleuther GPT neo 125 million parameter model.
We have used this model several times before.
In later exercises at the end of this code challenge, we will also be using a much bigger version of
this model with 1.3 billion parameters, but we can worry about that later.
Anyway, uh, implant uh, a hook into the MLP expansion layers.
And this is also code that you've seen before.
So we want to be extracting the activations of these neurons here.
Now what's new here in this code challenge is doing this for all of the layers.
Now this model has 12 transformer blocks.
And so you will need 12 sets of MLP expansion neuron activations.
So that means you need a unique hook function in each MLP layer.
So yeah, remember there are 3072 neurons that corresponds to an embedding dimensionality of 768 with
A4X expansion.
So this is for the 125 million parameter version of this GPT neo model.
In later exercises, it will be actually bigger than this.
So therefore it will be convenient for the rest of this code challenge.
If you define a variable that codes for the number of neurons in the MLP expansion layer within one
transformer block.
By the way, you do not actually need the GPU here for this code challenge.
In fact, there's only going to be one forward pass through this model in a later exercise, and that
only takes around a minute or so to do on the CPU, at least for the small version of this model.
So if you feel like dealing with the extra code to connect to a GPU, then go for it.
I actually started off this code challenge without using the GPU.
I did everything on the CPU, but at the very end, when I switched to the larger version of this model,
I did decide to go for the GPU over the CPU.
Anyway, it's just a difference between minutes versus seconds.
Not a big deal either way.
Okay, so now you can pause the video, switch to code and import the model and implant the hooks.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
This code here is to update the latest version of the data sets, uh, library from hugging face.
You will remember from earlier in this course that at least at the time that I'm recording this video,
uh, this still crashes if you try to import it and load data without first updating it.
Now you don't need that for exercise one.
This is something we will do in exercise two.
Anyway, that's just a little reminder.
It is possible that by the time you are watching this colab and hugging face have fixed this conflict
and therefore you don't actually need to worry about this thing.
Anyway, here I'm importing a bunch of modules.
Some of these are libraries that we use in basically every video.
Some of these are for later exercises like this one and this one.
So we'll get back to those later.
Okay.
So here I'm importing the model and I'm going to implant the hooks here.
You can see I'm importing the 125 million parameter version of this model.
This code here you don't need to worry about.
You can leave it commented.
This is for exercise seven when we're going to work with the larger model, but I just want to point
out that the naming convention is basically the same here.
It's just, you know, we have some extra number at the end to specify how many parameters we have.
Okay.
Here I'm importing the GPU again, totally optional.
You really don't need the GPU for this exercise, but you do want to switch the model into eval mode.
That's generally a good idea when you are not training the model.
Okay, here I have the hook function.
Now all of this is identical to what you've seen before.
This is new, but it's not really Earth Shatteringly new.
All I'm doing is taking this code to implant the hook.
Uh, and then, yeah, calling these functions with this layer number.
And then all I do is take this line and put it inside a for loop.
So it's going to implant a hook into each Individual layer, and you can see that the name of the key
that I use in the dictionary is unique to each layer.
So that means that every time I run a forward pass, all of these data will get replaced.
They will get overwritten.
But that's fine because we're only actually doing one forward pass in this code challenge, but it's
not going to overwrite over layers.
So for example, if I did this, if I just wrote MLP neurons or something activations uh, then uh with
the code looking like this, then this actually would keep overwriting every layer and we would only
end up with the final layer here.
Okay, just a little bit of a coding reminder.
Uh, that looked like that.
Uh, yeah.
And also, uh, because I'm not specifying any outputs here, it will be impossible when I run this
code to remove the hooks.
Now, that's something that sometimes you want to think about.
Sometimes you don't have to worry about.
Uh, in this code challenge, we.
It doesn't really matter.
We can just leave the hooks in the model.
I'm not going to save these models or use them for inference.
Okay, so all of that is great.
Here I have a variable called n neurons.
That is the number of neurons in here I'm picking uh transformer block for.
But it doesn't actually matter.
They all have the same number of neurons for the forward.
Uh, let me actually just run this code here.
Uh, maybe I'll do it like this just so you can see what I'm doing here.
Okay, so here I'm accessing the MLP layer of this transformer block.
This is the expansion part of the MLP block.
And then I'm getting the weight that is all the actual parameters.
And then the shape of that.
And here we see the number of neurons over here okay.
So this is soft coded, which is good because it means that this can easily adapt to other types of
models.
In particular, the larger version of this model, which has more than 3000 neurons.
The goal of this exercise is to import the fine web dataset.
We have worked with this dataset several times earlier in this course, for example in the section on
evals on quantitative evaluations.
Now you do not need the full data set.
That's actually good.
The full data set is like trillions of tokens.
But basically you just keep importing more and more text until you get up to exactly 8192 tokens and
which you can store in one vector.
Now, that might seem like a strange number of tokens, but you will see what this number corresponds
to later on.
This is a screenshot where you can see importing some of the data up here.
And then I'm just printing out a couple of tokens from the first couple of sequences of the data.
The next part of exercise two is to create a bar plot of token lengths.
And that looks like this.
So the shortest tokens had one character.
And in the data set that I imported.
So just the beginning of this data set up to 8000 tokens.
The longest token was 16 characters long.
The vertical line here shows the median of this data set.
And as a reminder, the median of a data set is the number that splits the data into two equal parts.
That means that half of the data are smaller, so half of the tokens have a number of characters a token
length smaller than the median, and half the data are larger than the median.
Now, that explanation of splitting the data into two equal sized halves, that is true for floating
point numbers.
But token lengths are integers and the median is also an integer.
So it turns out that if you would count the number of tokens less than the median, plus the number
of tokens that are greater than the median.
So longer tokens than the median, then you actually don't get all of the tokens, because lots of tokens
are exactly equal to the median token length.
You can see it's around 1400.
Somewhere around 1400 tokens have exactly four characters, which is the exact median.
Now that is not a problem.
That's not like an issue with statistics.
It's just something to keep in mind.
It's just the way that things can shake out when you're working with the median, with Integer valued
numbers.
And that leads me to the final part of this exercise, which is to count and report the number of tokens
that are shorter than the median, longer than the median, and exactly equal to the median.
So you can see that the number of tokens shorter and longer than the median is almost perfectly split.
And yeah, well this group ends up being a little bit smaller.
But that's fine.
It doesn't matter.
So we can still form three groups of tokens according to their lengths.
In the next exercise, you are going to examine the activation magnitudes of MLP neurons for these different
token lengths.
But you don't need to worry about the model part for this exercise, just import the data and look at
the token lengths distributions.
So now you should pause the video and code up this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here I am importing the fine web dataset, or at least part of it.
Here I'm getting an iterator and that I'm using over here just to loop through and show a couple of
examples so that you can see here.
So just going through the first five examples and printing out some of the text.
I'm not printing out all of the samples.
I'm also not printing out the first hundred tokens because these are not yet tokenized.
So these are just examples in text.
And I'm only printing out the first hundred characters from the first five.
Just to give you a bit of a reminder of what this dataset looks like.
All right.
So here is where I'm going to extract tokens from this data set.
And in particular 8192 tokens.
I'm going to store all of those tokens into a vector one dimensional tensor, but we can think of this
as a vector.
I initialize it to be empty.
We want these to be torched long because these are, uh, token indices.
We're going to push these into the model.
So we want these to be integers.
Okay.
And then this is a variable that I will use to store all of the lengths of the tokens in terms of the
number of characters of each token.
Okay here I have a while loop.
And essentially the idea is that I'm going to stay in this while loop and continue importing more text
and tokenizing and counting the lengths of the tokens up until I have more tokens than I need.
Okay, so here's how that works.
So I get some new data out of the iterator and then I tokenize.
Here I'm getting the length.
So uh, looping over all of the tokens from here and then decoding the token to transform the token
into a string into text, and then just counting the number of characters in there.
This will give me a list, and here I'm transforming it into a numpy array.
So that is the token lengths for this particular data sample.
Okay.
And then what I'm doing in these two lines is concatenating these tokens that I've just imported.
And these token lengths that I've just calculated onto these variables all tokens and all token lengths.
So the idea is that these will get bigger and bigger, longer and longer until this condition is satisfied,
which is that the number of tokens is greater than how many tokens I want.
Now, it's unlikely that this is going to be exactly equal to 8192, because yeah, we just we cannot
guarantee how many tokens are in each sample here.
Uh, so therefore I assume that this, that these two variables will be longer than the number of tokens
that I want.
And so the final step of this code cell is to trim the vectors down.
So I replace the vector with itself.
And just the first 8192.
Okay.
And then you see uh here's what they look like.
There's the size.
And let me just very quickly show you these, uh, variables here.
So all tokens, this is a list of integers.
And let's look at the lengths.
And here we see this is a numpy array of token lengths.
So the first token has three characters.
The third token has nine characters and so on okay.
So with those data I can now create the bar plot.
So here I find all of the unique values in the token lengths and return their counts.
Now if these were floating point numbers then we would take a histogram.
We would use numpy dot histogram to get the distribution.
But that's not what we do for integer data.
You can use numpy dot unique that gives you all the unique values and the counts.
So how often each unique value is observed.
And then here I'm getting the median using numpy dot median.
Okay so I think that is pretty straightforward.
Here I am calculating all of the token lengths that are less than the median.
Greater than the median and exactly equal to the median.
Okay.
And then summing and yeah just printing that out.
Now here again, so this is just, you know, a little reminder of statistics.
If these were floating point numbers, then the median is, you know, you would find that the number
of elements here is going to be zero, maybe one, but it would be 1 or 0.
You certainly wouldn't get like a seventh or an eighth of the entire data set is equal to the median
unless your data have integer values.
Again, that's not at all a problem.
It's not a statistical problem, it's not a numerical problem.
It's just something to keep in mind.
Now to get back to the model, you have 8000 tokens in a vector, and you should reshape those into
a batch of 16 by 512.
And that is where we get 8192 from.
That fits exactly into one batch of 16 sequences by 512 tokens.
Then you can run that batch through the model and you don't have to worry about calculating a loss or
next token predictions or output logits or anything like that.
We just want the hooked activations.
Now this is the step here that takes around a minute on the CPU or a couple of seconds on the GPU.
Then you can confirm that you get 12 sets of activations corresponding to the 12 transformer blocks,
and then you can confirm that for just one of them, you should get a size of the activations of 16
by five, 12 by 3072, corresponding to 16 batches.
So 16 sequences, 512 tokens, and 3072 neurons in the MLP expansion layer.
You don't have to do any other analyses that comes up in the next exercise.
So here you can just focus on extracting these activations.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
I hope it doesn't give you too much trouble.
And now I will switch to code.
Here I'm creating my batch.
And yeah, just confirming the shape and the type of the batch.
It is 16 by 512, so that is one of the reasons why I said to import exactly 8192.
There is another reason why I picked this number to be the number of tokens.
But I'm going to keep that secret until we get to exercise seven.
Anyway, uh, yeah.
So that's that.
Here I run the data through the model.
You can see it is quite fast.
Uh, less than one second.
If you run this on the CPU, it takes around a minute.
Uh, on the GPU, it was, uh, sorry.
With the big model in exercise seven that was taking around five minutes on the CPU, and then I just
gave up and switched to the GPU where it takes a whopping two seconds.
Crazy.
Uh, okay.
So let's see here.
I'm looking at the, uh, activations, uh, variable that, uh, that is created from the hook.
So we have, uh, the keys are MLP zero up to 11.
Of course, those correspond to the 12 MLP subblocks in the 12 transformer layers.
And here I'm just checking the size of one activations matrix.
So I just picked this one at random.
They're all the same size.
You can pick any one of those to show 16 sequences in our batch 512 tokens per batch or per sequence,
and 3072 neurons in the MLP expansion layer.